Title: Constipation - Diagnosis and treatment - Mayo Clinic
Source: Mayo Clinic
URL: https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/constipation/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20354259
Topic: constipation
Word Count: 10589
Downloaded: 2025-11-21 19:05:37
================================================================================

Print DiagnosisIn addition to giving you a general physical exam, your health care professional will likely do the following during your appointment: Gently press on your abdomen to check for pain, tenderness or irregular lumps. Look at the tissue of the anus and the surrounding skin. Use a gloved finger to check the condition of the rectum and the muscles of the anus. You'll also be asked questions about your medical history, diet, exercise habits and stools. For some people, the information from this appointment may be enough for a diagnosis and treatment plan. For other people, one or more additional tests may be needed to help the health care team understand the nature or cause of constipation. Laboratory testsYour health care professional may send samples of your blood to a lab to test for diseases or conditions that can cause constipation. EndoscopyYour health care professional may order a procedure called an endoscopy. A small tube with a camera is guided into the colon. This can reveal the condition of the colon or the presence of irregular tissues. Before this procedure, you may have a limited diet, use an enema or drink solutions that clean out your colon. There are generally two types of tests: A colonoscopy is an exam of the rectum and entire colon. A sigmoidoscopy is an exam of the rectum and the lower part of the colon, also called the sigmoid or descending colon. Imaging testsDepending on your symptoms, your health care professional may order X-ray imaging. An X-ray can show where stool is present in the colon and if the colon is blocked. Imaging tests, such as a CT scan or MRI, may be needed to diagnose conditions that may be causing constipation. Tests of stool movementYour health care professional may order a test that tracks the movement of stool through the colon. This is called a colorectal transit study. Such studies include: Radiopaque marker study. This X-ray procedure shows how far tiny pellets from a pill have moved through the colon over a period of time. Scintigraphy. This study involves eating a meal with tiny radioactive substances that are tracked with special technology as they move through the colon. Tests of the rectum and anusOther tests may be used to measure how well the rectum and anus work and how well a person can pass stool. Anorectal manometry. A narrow, flexible tube is inserted into the anus and rectum. After a small balloonlike device is inflated, it is pulled back out the anus. The procedure measures the coordination of the muscles used to pass stool. Balloon expulsion test. This test measures the amount of time it takes to push out a small, water-filled balloon in the rectum. This provides information on how well muscles work or are controlled. Defecography. This test is designed to mimic passing stool. A thick substance that can be tracked with imaging technology is placed in the rectum. X-ray or MRI images can reveal information about how well the rectum and anus work when the substance is passed like stool. Care at Mayo Clinic Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your constipation-related health concerns. Start Here More InformationConstipation care at Mayo ClinicColonoscopyFlexible sigmoidoscopyX-rayShow more related information TreatmentTreatment for constipation usually begins with diet and lifestyle changes meant to increase the speed at which stool moves through the colon. Also, your health care professional may change the medicines you take if they may be causing or worsening constipation. If those changes don't help, other treatments may be necessary. Diet and lifestyle changesYour doctor may recommend the following changes to relieve your constipation: Eat a high-fiber diet. Fiber adds bulk to stool and helps the stool hold fluids. These factors give stool the right shape and weight to move through the colon. Fiber-rich foods include fruits, vegetables, beans, and whole-grain bread, cereal and rice. Increase dietary fiber slowly to prevent bloating and gas. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend 25 to 34 grams of fiber a day depending on recommended daily calories. Drink plenty of water. Drink water and beverages without caffeine. This keeps stools soft and prevents bloating and gas that can happen with increased dietary fiber. Exercise most days of the week. Regular physical activity helps improve the movement of stool through the colon. Try to exercise most days of the week. If you do not already exercise, talk with your health care professional about safe ways to start. Use good bowel habits. Don't avoid the urge to pass stool. Keep a schedule for passing stool. For example, try to pass stool 15 to 45 minutes after a meal because digestion helps move stool through the colon. Prunes, also called dried plums, have long been used to treat or prevent constipation. Prunes are a good source of fiber, but they also have naturally present agents that draw fluids into the colon. LaxativesLaxatives are medicines that help move stool through the colon. Each laxative works somewhat differently. The following are available without prescriptions: Fiber supplements. Fiber supplements help stool retain fluids. The stool is then softer and easier to pass. Fiber supplements include psyllium (Metamucil, Konsyl, others), calcium polycarbophil (FiberCon, Equalactin, others) and methylcellulose (Citrucel). Osmotics. Osmotic laxatives help stool move through the colon by increasing the amount of fluids released into the intestine. Examples include oral magnesium hydroxide (Phillips' Milk of Magnesia, Dulcolax Liquid, others), magnesium citrate, lactulose (Generlac) and polyethylene glycol (Miralax). Stimulants. Stimulants cause the walls of the intestine to tighten, forcing the movement of stool. These include bisacodyl (Correctol, Dulcolax Laxative, others) and sennosides (Senokot, Ex-Lax, Perdiem). Lubricants. Lubricants such as mineral oil enable stool to move through the colon more easily. Stool softeners. Stool softeners such as docusate sodium (Colace) and docusate calcium allow more fluids to be drawn into the stool. Enemas and suppositoriesAn enema is a fluid gently pumped into the rectum to help pass stool. An enema may be used when other treatments don't work. Your health care professional may use one of these if the rectum is blocked with stool. Some are also available without prescription. The fluid may be: Tap water. Tap water with mild soap. Mineral oil. A suppository is a small tube-shaped object placed in the rectum to deliver a medicine. The suppository melts at body temperature and releases the medicine. Suppositories for constipation may have one of the following: Osmotic laxative. Stimulant laxative. Lubricant laxative. Prescription medicinesYour health care professional may prescribe other medicines if other treatments don't work. These include: Lubiprostone (Amitiza). Linaclotide (Linzess). Plecanatide (Trulance). Prucalopride (Motegrity). If constipation is caused by opioid pain medicine, you may take a prescription medicine that blocks the effect of opioids on stool movement through the colon. These include: Methylnaltrexone (Relistor). Naldemedine (Symproic). Naloxegol (Movantik). Pelvic muscle trainingBiofeedback training involves working with a therapist who uses devices to help you learn to relax muscles and coordinate the use of muscles in your pelvis, rectum and anus. These exercises may correct problems with chronic constipation. Sensors in the rectum and on the skin provide feedback as sound or light on a device as the therapist helps you go through various exercises. These cues help train you to control the muscles needed to pass stool. SurgerySurgery may be necessary to correct damage or irregularities in the tissues or nerves of the colon or rectum. Surgery is usually done only when other treatments for chronic constipation haven't worked. Request an appointment There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form. Get the latest health information from Mayo Clinic delivered to your inbox. Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview. Email address ErrorEmail field is required ErrorInclude a valid email address Address 1 Subscribe Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data. We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. Thank you for subscribing Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care. If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com. Sorry something went wrong with your subscription Please, try again in a couple of minutes Retry Clinical trials Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition. Alternative medicineResearcher are studying the use of probiotics and acupuncture to treat constipation. Further research is needed to understand these options. Preparing for your appointmentYou'll likely first see your doctor or other general health care professional. You may be referred to a specialist in digestive disorders, called a gastroenterologist. Because appointments can be brief, and because there's often a lot of information to cover, it's a good idea to be well prepared. Here's some information to help you get ready, and what to expect from your doctor. What you can do Be aware of any pre-appointment restrictions. At the time you make the appointment, be sure to ask if there's anything you need to do in advance, such as restricting your diet. Write down any symptoms you're experiencing. Write down key personal information, including any major stresses or recent life changes, such as traveling or be coming pregnant. Make a list of all medications, vitamins, supplements or herbal medications you're taking. Take a family member or friend along. Sometimes it can be difficult to remember all the information provided to you during an appointment. Someone who comes with you may remember something that you missed or forgot. Write down questions to ask your doctor. For constipation, some questions you might want to ask your doctor include: What's the most likely cause of my symptoms? What kinds of tests do I need, and how do I need to prepare for them? Am I at risk of complications related to this condition? What treatment do you recommend? If the first treatment doesn't work, what will we try next? Are there any dietary restrictions that I need to follow? I have other medical problems. How can I manage these along with constipation? In addition to the questions that you've prepared to ask your doctor, don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment. What to expect from your doctorYour doctor is likely to ask you several questions. Your doctor may ask: When did you did you first have symptoms of constipation? Have your symptoms been constant or off-and-on? How severe are your symptoms? What, if anything, seems to improve your symptoms? What, if anything, appears to worsen your symptoms? Do your symptoms include stomach pain? Do your symptoms include vomiting? Have you recently lost weight without trying? How many meals do you eat a day? How much liquid, including water, do you drink a day? Do you see blood mixed in with the stool, in the toilet water or on the toilet paper? Do you strain when passing stool? Do you have any family history of digestive problems or colon cancer? Have you been diagnosed with any other medical conditions? Have you started any new medicines or recently changed the dosage of your current medicine? By Mayo Clinic Staff Constipation care at Mayo Clinic Request an appointment Symptoms & causesDoctors & departments April 15, 2025 PrintShow references Constipation and defecation problems. American College of Gastroenterology. https://gi.org/topics/constipation-and-defection-problems/. Accessed May 30, 2023. Constipation. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/constipation/all-content. Accessed May 30, 2023. Constipation. American Gastroenterological Association. https://patient.gastro.org/constipation/. Accessed May 30, 2023. AskMayoExpert. Constipation (adult). Mayo Clinic; 2023. Wald A. Etiology and evaluation of chronic constipation in adults. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed May 30, 2023. 2020-2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov. Accessed June 7, 2023. Wald A. Management of chronic constipation in adults. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed May 30, 2023. Friedman S, et al., eds. Chronic constipation & fecal incontinence. In: Greenberger's Current Diagnosis & Treatment: Gastroenterology, Hepatology, & Endoscopy. 4th ed. McGraw Hill; 2022. https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com. Accessed May 30, 2023. Ma W, et al. The gut microbiome and colonic motility disorders: A practical framework for the gastroenterologist. Current Gastroenterology Reports. 2022; doi:10.1007/s11894-022-00847-4. Related Laxatives Associated Procedures Colonoscopy Flexible sigmoidoscopy X-ray Products & Services A Book: Mayo Clinic on Digestive Health ConstipationSymptoms&causesDiagnosis&treatmentDoctors&departmentsCare atMayoClinic Advertisement Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission. Advertising & Sponsorship Policy Opportunities Ad Choices Mayo Clinic Press Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press. NEW: Mayo Clinic Guide to Better Sleep Listen to Health Matters Podcast Mayo Clinic on Incontinence The Essential Diabetes Book FREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment Mayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book Print DiagnosisIn addition to giving you a general physical exam, your health care professional will likely do the following during your appointment: Gently press on your abdomen to check for pain, tenderness or irregular lumps. Look at the tissue of the anus and the surrounding skin. Use a gloved finger to check the condition of the rectum and the muscles of the anus. You'll also be asked questions about your medical history, diet, exercise habits and stools. For some people, the information from this appointment may be enough for a diagnosis and treatment plan. For other people, one or more additional tests may be needed to help the health care team understand the nature or cause of constipation. Laboratory testsYour health care professional may send samples of your blood to a lab to test for diseases or conditions that can cause constipation. EndoscopyYour health care professional may order a procedure called an endoscopy. A small tube with a camera is guided into the colon. This can reveal the condition of the colon or the presence of irregular tissues. Before this procedure, you may have a limited diet, use an enema or drink solutions that clean out your colon. There are generally two types of tests: A colonoscopy is an exam of the rectum and entire colon. A sigmoidoscopy is an exam of the rectum and the lower part of the colon, also called the sigmoid or descending colon. Imaging testsDepending on your symptoms, your health care professional may order X-ray imaging. An X-ray can show where stool is present in the colon and if the colon is blocked. Imaging tests, such as a CT scan or MRI, may be needed to diagnose conditions that may be causing constipation. Tests of stool movementYour health care professional may order a test that tracks the movement of stool through the colon. This is called a colorectal transit study. Such studies include: Radiopaque marker study. This X-ray procedure shows how far tiny pellets from a pill have moved through the colon over a period of time. Scintigraphy. This study involves eating a meal with tiny radioactive substances that are tracked with special technology as they move through the colon. Tests of the rectum and anusOther tests may be used to measure how well the rectum and anus work and how well a person can pass stool. Anorectal manometry. A narrow, flexible tube is inserted into the anus and rectum. After a small balloonlike device is inflated, it is pulled back out the anus. The procedure measures the coordination of the muscles used to pass stool. Balloon expulsion test. This test measures the amount of time it takes to push out a small, water-filled balloon in the rectum. This provides information on how well muscles work or are controlled. Defecography. This test is designed to mimic passing stool. A thick substance that can be tracked with imaging technology is placed in the rectum. X-ray or MRI images can reveal information about how well the rectum and anus work when the substance is passed like stool. Care at Mayo Clinic Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your constipation-related health concerns. Start Here More InformationConstipation care at Mayo ClinicColonoscopyFlexible sigmoidoscopyX-rayShow more related information TreatmentTreatment for constipation usually begins with diet and lifestyle changes meant to increase the speed at which stool moves through the colon. Also, your health care professional may change the medicines you take if they may be causing or worsening constipation. If those changes don't help, other treatments may be necessary. Diet and lifestyle changesYour doctor may recommend the following changes to relieve your constipation: Eat a high-fiber diet. Fiber adds bulk to stool and helps the stool hold fluids. These factors give stool the right shape and weight to move through the colon. Fiber-rich foods include fruits, vegetables, beans, and whole-grain bread, cereal and rice. Increase dietary fiber slowly to prevent bloating and gas. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend 25 to 34 grams of fiber a day depending on recommended daily calories. Drink plenty of water. Drink water and beverages without caffeine. This keeps stools soft and prevents bloating and gas that can happen with increased dietary fiber. Exercise most days of the week. Regular physical activity helps improve the movement of stool through the colon. Try to exercise most days of the week. If you do not already exercise, talk with your health care professional about safe ways to start. Use good bowel habits. Don't avoid the urge to pass stool. Keep a schedule for passing stool. For example, try to pass stool 15 to 45 minutes after a meal because digestion helps move stool through the colon. Prunes, also called dried plums, have long been used to treat or prevent constipation. Prunes are a good source of fiber, but they also have naturally present agents that draw fluids into the colon. LaxativesLaxatives are medicines that help move stool through the colon. Each laxative works somewhat differently. The following are available without prescriptions: Fiber supplements. Fiber supplements help stool retain fluids. The stool is then softer and easier to pass. Fiber supplements include psyllium (Metamucil, Konsyl, others), calcium polycarbophil (FiberCon, Equalactin, others) and methylcellulose (Citrucel). Osmotics. Osmotic laxatives help stool move through the colon by increasing the amount of fluids released into the intestine. Examples include oral magnesium hydroxide (Phillips' Milk of Magnesia, Dulcolax Liquid, others), magnesium citrate, lactulose (Generlac) and polyethylene glycol (Miralax). Stimulants. Stimulants cause the walls of the intestine to tighten, forcing the movement of stool. These include bisacodyl (Correctol, Dulcolax Laxative, others) and sennosides (Senokot, Ex-Lax, Perdiem). Lubricants. Lubricants such as mineral oil enable stool to move through the colon more easily. Stool softeners. Stool softeners such as docusate sodium (Colace) and docusate calcium allow more fluids to be drawn into the stool. Enemas and suppositoriesAn enema is a fluid gently pumped into the rectum to help pass stool. An enema may be used when other treatments don't work. Your health care professional may use one of these if the rectum is blocked with stool. Some are also available without prescription. The fluid may be: Tap water. Tap water with mild soap. Mineral oil. A suppository is a small tube-shaped object placed in the rectum to deliver a medicine. The suppository melts at body temperature and releases the medicine. Suppositories for constipation may have one of the following: Osmotic laxative. Stimulant laxative. Lubricant laxative. Prescription medicinesYour health care professional may prescribe other medicines if other treatments don't work. These include: Lubiprostone (Amitiza). Linaclotide (Linzess). Plecanatide (Trulance). Prucalopride (Motegrity). If constipation is caused by opioid pain medicine, you may take a prescription medicine that blocks the effect of opioids on stool movement through the colon. These include: Methylnaltrexone (Relistor). Naldemedine (Symproic). Naloxegol (Movantik). Pelvic muscle trainingBiofeedback training involves working with a therapist who uses devices to help you learn to relax muscles and coordinate the use of muscles in your pelvis, rectum and anus. These exercises may correct problems with chronic constipation. Sensors in the rectum and on the skin provide feedback as sound or light on a device as the therapist helps you go through various exercises. These cues help train you to control the muscles needed to pass stool. SurgerySurgery may be necessary to correct damage or irregularities in the tissues or nerves of the colon or rectum. Surgery is usually done only when other treatments for chronic constipation haven't worked. Request an appointment There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form. Get the latest health information from Mayo Clinic delivered to your inbox. Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview. Email address ErrorEmail field is required ErrorInclude a valid email address Address 1 Subscribe Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data. We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. Thank you for subscribing Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care. If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com. Sorry something went wrong with your subscription Please, try again in a couple of minutes Retry Clinical trials Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition. Alternative medicineResearcher are studying the use of probiotics and acupuncture to treat constipation. Further research is needed to understand these options. Preparing for your appointmentYou'll likely first see your doctor or other general health care professional. You may be referred to a specialist in digestive disorders, called a gastroenterologist. Because appointments can be brief, and because there's often a lot of information to cover, it's a good idea to be well prepared. Here's some information to help you get ready, and what to expect from your doctor. What you can do Be aware of any pre-appointment restrictions. At the time you make the appointment, be sure to ask if there's anything you need to do in advance, such as restricting your diet. Write down any symptoms you're experiencing. Write down key personal information, including any major stresses or recent life changes, such as traveling or be coming pregnant. Make a list of all medications, vitamins, supplements or herbal medications you're taking. Take a family member or friend along. Sometimes it can be difficult to remember all the information provided to you during an appointment. Someone who comes with you may remember something that you missed or forgot. Write down questions to ask your doctor. For constipation, some questions you might want to ask your doctor include: What's the most likely cause of my symptoms? What kinds of tests do I need, and how do I need to prepare for them? Am I at risk of complications related to this condition? What treatment do you recommend? If the first treatment doesn't work, what will we try next? Are there any dietary restrictions that I need to follow? I have other medical problems. How can I manage these along with constipation? In addition to the questions that you've prepared to ask your doctor, don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment. What to expect from your doctorYour doctor is likely to ask you several questions. Your doctor may ask: When did you did you first have symptoms of constipation? Have your symptoms been constant or off-and-on? How severe are your symptoms? What, if anything, seems to improve your symptoms? What, if anything, appears to worsen your symptoms? Do your symptoms include stomach pain? Do your symptoms include vomiting? Have you recently lost weight without trying? How many meals do you eat a day? How much liquid, including water, do you drink a day? Do you see blood mixed in with the stool, in the toilet water or on the toilet paper? Do you strain when passing stool? Do you have any family history of digestive problems or colon cancer? Have you been diagnosed with any other medical conditions? Have you started any new medicines or recently changed the dosage of your current medicine? By Mayo Clinic Staff Constipation care at Mayo Clinic Request an appointment Symptoms & causesDoctors & departments April 15, 2025 PrintShow references Constipation and defecation problems. American College of Gastroenterology. https://gi.org/topics/constipation-and-defection-problems/. Accessed May 30, 2023. Constipation. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/constipation/all-content. Accessed May 30, 2023. Constipation. American Gastroenterological Association. https://patient.gastro.org/constipation/. Accessed May 30, 2023. AskMayoExpert. Constipation (adult). Mayo Clinic; 2023. Wald A. Etiology and evaluation of chronic constipation in adults. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed May 30, 2023. 2020-2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov. Accessed June 7, 2023. Wald A. Management of chronic constipation in adults. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed May 30, 2023. Friedman S, et al., eds. Chronic constipation & fecal incontinence. In: Greenberger's Current Diagnosis & Treatment: Gastroenterology, Hepatology, & Endoscopy. 4th ed. McGraw Hill; 2022. https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com. Accessed May 30, 2023. Ma W, et al. The gut microbiome and colonic motility disorders: A practical framework for the gastroenterologist. Current Gastroenterology Reports. 2022; doi:10.1007/s11894-022-00847-4. Related Laxatives Associated Procedures Colonoscopy Flexible sigmoidoscopy X-ray Products & Services A Book: Mayo Clinic on Digestive Health ConstipationSymptoms&causesDiagnosis&treatmentDoctors&departmentsCare atMayoClinic DiagnosisIn addition to giving you a general physical exam, your health care professional will likely do the following during your appointment: Gently press on your abdomen to check for pain, tenderness or irregular lumps. Look at the tissue of the anus and the surrounding skin. Use a gloved finger to check the condition of the rectum and the muscles of the anus. You'll also be asked questions about your medical history, diet, exercise habits and stools. For some people, the information from this appointment may be enough for a diagnosis and treatment plan. For other people, one or more additional tests may be needed to help the health care team understand the nature or cause of constipation. Laboratory testsYour health care professional may send samples of your blood to a lab to test for diseases or conditions that can cause constipation. EndoscopyYour health care professional may order a procedure called an endoscopy. A small tube with a camera is guided into the colon. This can reveal the condition of the colon or the presence of irregular tissues. Before this procedure, you may have a limited diet, use an enema or drink solutions that clean out your colon. There are generally two types of tests: A colonoscopy is an exam of the rectum and entire colon. A sigmoidoscopy is an exam of the rectum and the lower part of the colon, also called the sigmoid or descending colon. Imaging testsDepending on your symptoms, your health care professional may order X-ray imaging. An X-ray can show where stool is present in the colon and if the colon is blocked. Imaging tests, such as a CT scan or MRI, may be needed to diagnose conditions that may be causing constipation. Tests of stool movementYour health care professional may order a test that tracks the movement of stool through the colon. This is called a colorectal transit study. Such studies include: Radiopaque marker study. This X-ray procedure shows how far tiny pellets from a pill have moved through the colon over a period of time. Scintigraphy. This study involves eating a meal with tiny radioactive substances that are tracked with special technology as they move through the colon. Tests of the rectum and anusOther tests may be used to measure how well the rectum and anus work and how well a person can pass stool. Anorectal manometry. A narrow, flexible tube is inserted into the anus and rectum. After a small balloonlike device is inflated, it is pulled back out the anus. The procedure measures the coordination of the muscles used to pass stool. Balloon expulsion test. This test measures the amount of time it takes to push out a small, water-filled balloon in the rectum. This provides information on how well muscles work or are controlled. Defecography. This test is designed to mimic passing stool. A thick substance that can be tracked with imaging technology is placed in the rectum. X-ray or MRI images can reveal information about how well the rectum and anus work when the substance is passed like stool. Care at Mayo Clinic Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your constipation-related health concerns. Start Here More InformationConstipation care at Mayo ClinicColonoscopyFlexible sigmoidoscopyX-rayShow more related information TreatmentTreatment for constipation usually begins with diet and lifestyle changes meant to increase the speed at which stool moves through the colon. Also, your health care professional may change the medicines you take if they may be causing or worsening constipation. If those changes don't help, other treatments may be necessary. Diet and lifestyle changesYour doctor may recommend the following changes to relieve your constipation: Eat a high-fiber diet. Fiber adds bulk to stool and helps the stool hold fluids. These factors give stool the right shape and weight to move through the colon. Fiber-rich foods include fruits, vegetables, beans, and whole-grain bread, cereal and rice. Increase dietary fiber slowly to prevent bloating and gas. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend 25 to 34 grams of fiber a day depending on recommended daily calories. Drink plenty of water. Drink water and beverages without caffeine. This keeps stools soft and prevents bloating and gas that can happen with increased dietary fiber. Exercise most days of the week. Regular physical activity helps improve the movement of stool through the colon. Try to exercise most days of the week. If you do not already exercise, talk with your health care professional about safe ways to start. Use good bowel habits. Don't avoid the urge to pass stool. Keep a schedule for passing stool. For example, try to pass stool 15 to 45 minutes after a meal because digestion helps move stool through the colon. Prunes, also called dried plums, have long been used to treat or prevent constipation. Prunes are a good source of fiber, but they also have naturally present agents that draw fluids into the colon. LaxativesLaxatives are medicines that help move stool through the colon. Each laxative works somewhat differently. The following are available without prescriptions: Fiber supplements. Fiber supplements help stool retain fluids. The stool is then softer and easier to pass. Fiber supplements include psyllium (Metamucil, Konsyl, others), calcium polycarbophil (FiberCon, Equalactin, others) and methylcellulose (Citrucel). Osmotics. Osmotic laxatives help stool move through the colon by increasing the amount of fluids released into the intestine. Examples include oral magnesium hydroxide (Phillips' Milk of Magnesia, Dulcolax Liquid, others), magnesium citrate, lactulose (Generlac) and polyethylene glycol (Miralax). Stimulants. Stimulants cause the walls of the intestine to tighten, forcing the movement of stool. These include bisacodyl (Correctol, Dulcolax Laxative, others) and sennosides (Senokot, Ex-Lax, Perdiem). Lubricants. Lubricants such as mineral oil enable stool to move through the colon more easily. Stool softeners. Stool softeners such as docusate sodium (Colace) and docusate calcium allow more fluids to be drawn into the stool. Enemas and suppositoriesAn enema is a fluid gently pumped into the rectum to help pass stool. An enema may be used when other treatments don't work. Your health care professional may use one of these if the rectum is blocked with stool. Some are also available without prescription. The fluid may be: Tap water. Tap water with mild soap. Mineral oil. A suppository is a small tube-shaped object placed in the rectum to deliver a medicine. The suppository melts at body temperature and releases the medicine. Suppositories for constipation may have one of the following: Osmotic laxative. Stimulant laxative. Lubricant laxative. Prescription medicinesYour health care professional may prescribe other medicines if other treatments don't work. These include: Lubiprostone (Amitiza). Linaclotide (Linzess). Plecanatide (Trulance). Prucalopride (Motegrity). If constipation is caused by opioid pain medicine, you may take a prescription medicine that blocks the effect of opioids on stool movement through the colon. These include: Methylnaltrexone (Relistor). Naldemedine (Symproic). Naloxegol (Movantik). Pelvic muscle trainingBiofeedback training involves working with a therapist who uses devices to help you learn to relax muscles and coordinate the use of muscles in your pelvis, rectum and anus. These exercises may correct problems with chronic constipation. Sensors in the rectum and on the skin provide feedback as sound or light on a device as the therapist helps you go through various exercises. These cues help train you to control the muscles needed to pass stool. SurgerySurgery may be necessary to correct damage or irregularities in the tissues or nerves of the colon or rectum. Surgery is usually done only when other treatments for chronic constipation haven't worked. Request an appointment There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form. Get the latest health information from Mayo Clinic delivered to your inbox. Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview. Email address ErrorEmail field is required ErrorInclude a valid email address Address 1 Subscribe Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data. We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. Thank you for subscribing Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care. If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com. Sorry something went wrong with your subscription Please, try again in a couple of minutes Retry Clinical trials Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition. Alternative medicineResearcher are studying the use of probiotics and acupuncture to treat constipation. Further research is needed to understand these options. Preparing for your appointmentYou'll likely first see your doctor or other general health care professional. You may be referred to a specialist in digestive disorders, called a gastroenterologist. Because appointments can be brief, and because there's often a lot of information to cover, it's a good idea to be well prepared. Here's some information to help you get ready, and what to expect from your doctor. What you can do Be aware of any pre-appointment restrictions. At the time you make the appointment, be sure to ask if there's anything you need to do in advance, such as restricting your diet. Write down any symptoms you're experiencing. Write down key personal information, including any major stresses or recent life changes, such as traveling or be coming pregnant. Make a list of all medications, vitamins, supplements or herbal medications you're taking. Take a family member or friend along. Sometimes it can be difficult to remember all the information provided to you during an appointment. Someone who comes with you may remember something that you missed or forgot. Write down questions to ask your doctor. For constipation, some questions you might want to ask your doctor include: What's the most likely cause of my symptoms? What kinds of tests do I need, and how do I need to prepare for them? Am I at risk of complications related to this condition? What treatment do you recommend? If the first treatment doesn't work, what will we try next? Are there any dietary restrictions that I need to follow? I have other medical problems. How can I manage these along with constipation? In addition to the questions that you've prepared to ask your doctor, don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment. What to expect from your doctorYour doctor is likely to ask you several questions. Your doctor may ask: When did you did you first have symptoms of constipation? Have your symptoms been constant or off-and-on? How severe are your symptoms? What, if anything, seems to improve your symptoms? What, if anything, appears to worsen your symptoms? Do your symptoms include stomach pain? Do your symptoms include vomiting? Have you recently lost weight without trying? How many meals do you eat a day? How much liquid, including water, do you drink a day? Do you see blood mixed in with the stool, in the toilet water or on the toilet paper? Do you strain when passing stool? Do you have any family history of digestive problems or colon cancer? Have you been diagnosed with any other medical conditions? Have you started any new medicines or recently changed the dosage of your current medicine? By Mayo Clinic Staff In addition to giving you a general physical exam, your health care professional will likely do the following during your appointment: Gently press on your abdomen to check for pain, tenderness or irregular lumps. Look at the tissue of the anus and the surrounding skin. Use a gloved finger to check the condition of the rectum and the muscles of the anus. You'll also be asked questions about your medical history, diet, exercise habits and stools. For some people, the information from this appointment may be enough for a diagnosis and treatment plan. For other people, one or more additional tests may be needed to help the health care team understand the nature or cause of constipation. Your health care professional may send samples of your blood to a lab to test for diseases or conditions that can cause constipation. Your health care professional may order a procedure called an endoscopy. A small tube with a camera is guided into the colon. This can reveal the condition of the colon or the presence of irregular tissues. Before this procedure, you may have a limited diet, use an enema or drink solutions that clean out your colon. There are generally two types of tests: A colonoscopy is an exam of the rectum and entire colon. A sigmoidoscopy is an exam of the rectum and the lower part of the colon, also called the sigmoid or descending colon. Depending on your symptoms, your health care professional may order X-ray imaging. An X-ray can show where stool is present in the colon and if the colon is blocked. Imaging tests, such as a CT scan or MRI, may be needed to diagnose conditions that may be causing constipation. Your health care professional may order a test that tracks the movement of stool through the colon. This is called a colorectal transit study. Such studies include: Radiopaque marker study. This X-ray procedure shows how far tiny pellets from a pill have moved through the colon over a period of time. Scintigraphy. This study involves eating a meal with tiny radioactive substances that are tracked with special technology as they move through the colon. Other tests may be used to measure how well the rectum and anus work and how well a person can pass stool. Anorectal manometry. A narrow, flexible tube is inserted into the anus and rectum. After a small balloonlike device is inflated, it is pulled back out the anus. The procedure measures the coordination of the muscles used to pass stool. Balloon expulsion test. This test measures the amount of time it takes to push out a small, water-filled balloon in the rectum. This provides information on how well muscles work or are controlled. Defecography. This test is designed to mimic passing stool. A thick substance that can be tracked with imaging technology is placed in the rectum. X-ray or MRI images can reveal information about how well the rectum and anus work when the substance is passed like stool. Care at Mayo Clinic Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your constipation-related health concerns. Start Here Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your constipation-related health concerns. Start Here More InformationConstipation care at Mayo ClinicColonoscopyFlexible sigmoidoscopyX-rayShow more related information Constipation care at Mayo ClinicColonoscopyFlexible sigmoidoscopyX-rayShow more related information Constipation care at Mayo Clinic Treatment for constipation usually begins with diet and lifestyle changes meant to increase the speed at which stool moves through the colon. Also, your health care professional may change the medicines you take if they may be causing or worsening constipation. If those changes don't help, other treatments may be necessary. Your doctor may recommend the following changes to relieve your constipation: Eat a high-fiber diet. Fiber adds bulk to stool and helps the stool hold fluids. These factors give stool the right shape and weight to move through the colon. Fiber-rich foods include fruits, vegetables, beans, and whole-grain bread, cereal and rice. Increase dietary fiber slowly to prevent bloating and gas. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend 25 to 34 grams of fiber a day depending on recommended daily calories. Drink plenty of water. Drink water and beverages without caffeine. This keeps stools soft and prevents bloating and gas that can happen with increased dietary fiber. Exercise most days of the week. Regular physical activity helps improve the movement of stool through the colon. Try to exercise most days of the week. If you do not already exercise, talk with your health care professional about safe ways to start. Use good bowel habits. Don't avoid the urge to pass stool. Keep a schedule for passing stool. For example, try to pass stool 15 to 45 minutes after a meal because digestion helps move stool through the colon. Prunes, also called dried plums, have long been used to treat or prevent constipation. Prunes are a good source of fiber, but they also have naturally present agents that draw fluids into the colon. Laxatives are medicines that help move stool through the colon. Each laxative works somewhat differently. The following are available without prescriptions: Fiber supplements. Fiber supplements help stool retain fluids. The stool is then softer and easier to pass. Fiber supplements include psyllium (Metamucil, Konsyl, others), calcium polycarbophil (FiberCon, Equalactin, others) and methylcellulose (Citrucel). Osmotics. Osmotic laxatives help stool move through the colon by increasing the amount of fluids released into the intestine. Examples include oral magnesium hydroxide (Phillips' Milk of Magnesia, Dulcolax Liquid, others), magnesium citrate, lactulose (Generlac) and polyethylene glycol (Miralax). Stimulants. Stimulants cause the walls of the intestine to tighten, forcing the movement of stool. These include bisacodyl (Correctol, Dulcolax Laxative, others) and sennosides (Senokot, Ex-Lax, Perdiem). Lubricants. Lubricants such as mineral oil enable stool to move through the colon more easily. Stool softeners. Stool softeners such as docusate sodium (Colace) and docusate calcium allow more fluids to be drawn into the stool. An enema is a fluid gently pumped into the rectum to help pass stool. An enema may be used when other treatments don't work. Your health care professional may use one of these if the rectum is blocked with stool. Some are also available without prescription. The fluid may be: A suppository is a small tube-shaped object placed in the rectum to deliver a medicine. The suppository melts at body temperature and releases the medicine. Suppositories for constipation may have one of the following: Your health care professional may prescribe other medicines if other treatments don't work. These include: If constipation is caused by opioid pain medicine, you may take a prescription medicine that blocks the effect of opioids on stool movement through the colon. These include: Biofeedback training involves working with a therapist who uses devices to help you learn to relax muscles and coordinate the use of muscles in your pelvis, rectum and anus. These exercises may correct problems with chronic constipation. Sensors in the rectum and on the skin provide feedback as sound or light on a device as the therapist helps you go through various exercises. These cues help train you to control the muscles needed to pass stool. Surgery may be necessary to correct damage or irregularities in the tissues or nerves of the colon or rectum. Surgery is usually done only when other treatments for chronic constipation haven't worked. There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form. Get the latest health information from Mayo Clinic delivered to your inbox. Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview. Email address ErrorEmail field is required ErrorInclude a valid email address Address 1 Subscribe Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data. We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. Thank you for subscribing Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care. If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com. Sorry something went wrong with your subscription Please, try again in a couple of minutes Retry There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form. Get the latest health information from Mayo Clinic delivered to your inbox. Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview. Email address ErrorEmail field is required ErrorInclude a valid email address Address 1 Subscribe Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data. We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. Thank you for subscribing Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care. If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com. Sorry something went wrong with your subscription Please, try again in a couple of minutes Retry There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form. Get the latest health information from Mayo Clinic delivered to your inbox. Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview. Email address ErrorEmail field is required ErrorInclude a valid email address Address 1 Subscribe Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data. We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. Thank you for subscribing Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care. If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com. Sorry something went wrong with your subscription Please, try again in a couple of minutes Retry There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form. Get the latest health information from Mayo Clinic delivered to your inbox. Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview. Email address ErrorEmail field is required ErrorInclude a valid email address Address 1 Subscribe Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data. We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. Thank you for subscribing Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care. If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com. Sorry something went wrong with your subscription Please, try again in a couple of minutes Retry There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form. Get the latest health information from Mayo Clinic delivered to your inbox. Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview. Email address ErrorEmail field is required ErrorInclude a valid email address Address 1 Subscribe Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data. We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. Thank you for subscribing Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care. If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com. Sorry something went wrong with your subscription Please, try again in a couple of minutes Retry There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form. Get the latest health information from Mayo Clinic delivered to your inbox. Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview. Email address ErrorEmail field is required ErrorInclude a valid email address Address 1 Subscribe Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data. We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form. There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form. Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview. Email address ErrorEmail field is required ErrorInclude a valid email address ErrorInclude a valid email address We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. Thank you for subscribing Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care. If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com. Sorry something went wrong with your subscription Please, try again in a couple of minutes Retry Thank you for subscribing Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care. If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com. Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care. If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com. Sorry something went wrong with your subscription Please, try again in a couple of minutes Retry Please, try again in a couple of minutes Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition. Researcher are studying the use of probiotics and acupuncture to treat constipation. Further research is needed to understand these options. You'll likely first see your doctor or other general health care professional. You may be referred to a specialist in digestive disorders, called a gastroenterologist. Because appointments can be brief, and because there's often a lot of information to cover, it's a good idea to be well prepared. Here's some information to help you get ready, and what to expect from your doctor. Be aware of any pre-appointment restrictions. At the time you make the appointment, be sure to ask if there's anything you need to do in advance, such as restricting your diet. Write down any symptoms you're experiencing. Write down key personal information, including any major stresses or recent life changes, such as traveling or be coming pregnant. Make a list of all medications, vitamins, supplements or herbal medications you're taking. Take a family member or friend along. Sometimes it can be difficult to remember all the information provided to you during an appointment. Someone who comes with you may remember something that you missed or forgot. Write down questions to ask your doctor. For constipation, some questions you might want to ask your doctor include: What's the most likely cause of my symptoms? What kinds of tests do I need, and how do I need to prepare for them? Am I at risk of complications related to this condition? What treatment do you recommend? If the first treatment doesn't work, what will we try next? Are there any dietary restrictions that I need to follow? I have other medical problems. How can I manage these along with constipation? In addition to the questions that you've prepared to ask your doctor, don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment. Your doctor is likely to ask you several questions. Your doctor may ask: When did you did you first have symptoms of constipation? Have your symptoms been constant or off-and-on? What, if anything, seems to improve your symptoms? What, if anything, appears to worsen your symptoms? Do your symptoms include stomach pain? Do your symptoms include vomiting? Have you recently lost weight without trying? How many meals do you eat a day? How much liquid, including water, do you drink a day? Do you see blood mixed in with the stool, in the toilet water or on the toilet paper? Do you strain when passing stool? Do you have any family history of digestive problems or colon cancer? Have you been diagnosed with any other medical conditions? Have you started any new medicines or recently changed the dosage of your current medicine? Constipation care at Mayo Clinic Constipation care at Mayo Clinic Symptoms & causesDoctors & departments Show references Constipation and defecation problems. American College of Gastroenterology. https://gi.org/topics/constipation-and-defection-problems/. Accessed May 30, 2023. Constipation. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/constipation/all-content. Accessed May 30, 2023. Constipation. American Gastroenterological Association. https://patient.gastro.org/constipation/. Accessed May 30, 2023. AskMayoExpert. Constipation (adult). Mayo Clinic; 2023. Wald A. Etiology and evaluation of chronic constipation in adults. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed May 30, 2023. 2020-2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov. Accessed June 7, 2023. Wald A. Management of chronic constipation in adults. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed May 30, 2023. Friedman S, et al., eds. Chronic constipation & fecal incontinence. In: Greenberger's Current Diagnosis & Treatment: Gastroenterology, Hepatology, & Endoscopy. 4th ed. McGraw Hill; 2022. https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com. Accessed May 30, 2023. Ma W, et al. The gut microbiome and colonic motility disorders: A practical framework for the gastroenterologist. Current Gastroenterology Reports. 2022; doi:10.1007/s11894-022-00847-4. Constipation and defecation problems. American College of Gastroenterology. https://gi.org/topics/constipation-and-defection-problems/. Accessed May 30, 2023. Constipation. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/constipation/all-content. Accessed May 30, 2023. Constipation. American Gastroenterological Association. https://patient.gastro.org/constipation/. Accessed May 30, 2023. AskMayoExpert. Constipation (adult). Mayo Clinic; 2023. Wald A. Etiology and evaluation of chronic constipation in adults. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed May 30, 2023. 2020-2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov. Accessed June 7, 2023. Wald A. Management of chronic constipation in adults. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed May 30, 2023. Friedman S, et al., eds. Chronic constipation & fecal incontinence. In: Greenberger's Current Diagnosis & Treatment: Gastroenterology, Hepatology, & Endoscopy. 4th ed. McGraw Hill; 2022. https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com. Accessed May 30, 2023. Ma W, et al. The gut microbiome and colonic motility disorders: A practical framework for the gastroenterologist. Current Gastroenterology Reports. 2022; doi:10.1007/s11894-022-00847-4. Constipation and defecation problems. American College of Gastroenterology. https://gi.org/topics/constipation-and-defection-problems/. Accessed May 30, 2023. Constipation. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/constipation/all-content. Accessed May 30, 2023. Constipation. American Gastroenterological Association. https://patient.gastro.org/constipation/. Accessed May 30, 2023. AskMayoExpert. Constipation (adult). Mayo Clinic; 2023. Wald A. Etiology and evaluation of chronic constipation in adults. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed May 30, 2023. 2020-2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov. Accessed June 7, 2023. Wald A. Management of chronic constipation in adults. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed May 30, 2023. Friedman S, et al., eds. Chronic constipation & fecal incontinence. In: Greenberger's Current Diagnosis & Treatment: Gastroenterology, Hepatology, & Endoscopy. 4th ed. McGraw Hill; 2022. https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com. Accessed May 30, 2023. Ma W, et al. The gut microbiome and colonic motility disorders: A practical framework for the gastroenterologist. Current Gastroenterology Reports. 2022; doi:10.1007/s11894-022-00847-4. Related Laxatives Associated Procedures Colonoscopy Flexible sigmoidoscopy X-ray Products & Services A Book: Mayo Clinic on Digestive Health Associated Procedures Colonoscopy Flexible sigmoidoscopy X-ray Products & Services A Book: Mayo Clinic on Digestive Health A Book: Mayo Clinic on Digestive Health ConstipationSymptoms&causesDiagnosis&treatmentDoctors&departmentsCare atMayoClinic Advertisement Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission. Advertising & Sponsorship Policy Opportunities Ad Choices Mayo Clinic Press Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press. NEW: Mayo Clinic Guide to Better Sleep Listen to Health Matters Podcast Mayo Clinic on Incontinence The Essential Diabetes Book FREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment Mayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book Advertisement Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission. Advertising & Sponsorship Policy Opportunities Ad Choices Mayo Clinic Press Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press. NEW: Mayo Clinic Guide to Better Sleep Listen to Health Matters Podcast Mayo Clinic on Incontinence The Essential Diabetes Book FREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment Mayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book Advertisement Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission. Advertising & Sponsorship Policy Opportunities Ad Choices Mayo Clinic Press Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press. NEW: Mayo Clinic Guide to Better Sleep Listen to Health Matters Podcast Mayo Clinic on Incontinence The Essential Diabetes Book FREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment Mayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission. Advertising & Sponsorship Policy Opportunities Ad Choices Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission. Mayo Clinic Press Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press. NEW: Mayo Clinic Guide to Better Sleep Listen to Health Matters Podcast Mayo Clinic on Incontinence The Essential Diabetes Book FREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment Mayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press. NEW: Mayo Clinic Guide to Better Sleep Listen to Health Matters Podcast FREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment Mayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book CON-20198827 Diseases & Conditions Constipation Diseases & Conditions Constipation