Title: Hemorrhoids
Source: MedlinePlus
URL: https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000292.htm
Topic: general
Word Count: 3296
Downloaded: 2025-11-21 19:06:19
================================================================================

Hemorrhoids To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Hemorrhoids are swollen veins in the anus or lower part of the rectum.Causes Hemorrhoids are very common. They result from increased pressure on the anus. This can occur during pregnancy or childbirth, and due to constipation. The pressure causes the normal anal veins and tissue to swell. This tissue can bleed, often during bowel movements.Hemorrhoids may be caused by:Straining during bowel movementsConstipationSitting for long periods of time, especially on the toiletCertain diseases, such as cirrhosisHemorrhoids may be inside or outside the body.Internal hemorrhoids occur just inside the anus, at the beginning of the rectum. When they are large, they may fall outside (prolapse). The most common problem with internal hemorrhoids is bleeding during bowel movements.External hemorrhoids occur outside the anus. They can result in difficulty cleaning the area after a bowel movement. If a blood clot forms in an external hemorrhoid, it can be very painful (thrombosed external hemorrhoid).Symptoms Hemorrhoids are most often not painful, but if a blood clot forms, they can be very painful.Common symptoms include:Painless bright red blood from the rectumAnal itching Anal ache or pain, especially while sitting Pain during bowel movements One or more hard or tender lumps near the anusExams and Tests Most of the time, a health care provider can diagnose hemorrhoids by simply looking at the rectal area. External hemorrhoids can often be detected this way.Tests that may help diagnose the problem include:Rectal examSigmoidoscopyAnoscopyTreatment Treatments for hemorrhoids include:Over-the-counter corticosteroid (for example, hydrocortisone) creams to help reduce pain and swellingHemorrhoid creams with lidocaine or other anesthetic to help reduce painStool softeners to help reduce straining and constipationThings you can do to reduce itching include:Apply witch hazel to the area with a cotton swab.Wear cotton underwear.Avoid toilet tissue with perfumes or colors. Use baby wipes instead.Try not to scratch the area. Sitz baths can help you to feel better. Sit in warm water for 10 to 15 minutes.If your hemorrhoids do not get better with home treatments, you may need some type of office treatment to shrink the hemorrhoids.If office treatment is not enough, some type of surgery may be necessary, such as removal of the hemorrhoids (hemorrhoidectomy). These procedures are generally used for people with severe bleeding or prolapse who have not responded to other therapy.Possible Complications The blood in the hemorrhoid may form clots. This can cause tissue around it to die. Surgery is sometimes needed to remove hemorrhoids with clots.Rarely, severe bleeding may also occur. Iron deficiency anemia can result from long-term blood loss.When to Contact a Medical Professional Contact your provider if:Hemorrhoid symptoms do not improve with home treatment.You have rectal bleeding. Your provider may want to check for other, more serious causes of the bleeding.Get medical help right away if:You lose a lot of bloodYou are bleeding and feel dizzy, lightheaded, or faintPrevention Constipation, straining during bowel movements, and sitting on the toilet too long raise your risk for hemorrhoids. To prevent constipation and hemorrhoids, you should:Drink plenty of fluids.Eat a high-fiber diet of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains.Consider using fiber supplements.Use stool softeners to prevent straining.Alternative Names Rectal lump; Piles; Lump in the rectum; Rectal bleeding - hemorrhoids; Blood in the stool - hemorrhoidsImages Hemorrhoids Hemorrhoid surgery - series References Bass LM, Wershil BK. Anatomy, histology, embryology, and developmental anomalies of the small and large intestine. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 98.Cameron J. Anorectal. In: Cameron J, ed. Current Surgical Therapy. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 5.Zainea GG, Pfenninger JL. Office treatment of hemorrhoids. In: Fowler GC, ed. Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 87. Review Date 9/9/2023 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, General Surgery Practice Specializing in Breast Cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Learn how to cite this page Related MedlinePlus Health Topics Hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Hemorrhoids are swollen veins in the anus or lower part of the rectum.Causes Hemorrhoids are very common. They result from increased pressure on the anus. This can occur during pregnancy or childbirth, and due to constipation. The pressure causes the normal anal veins and tissue to swell. This tissue can bleed, often during bowel movements.Hemorrhoids may be caused by:Straining during bowel movementsConstipationSitting for long periods of time, especially on the toiletCertain diseases, such as cirrhosisHemorrhoids may be inside or outside the body.Internal hemorrhoids occur just inside the anus, at the beginning of the rectum. When they are large, they may fall outside (prolapse). The most common problem with internal hemorrhoids is bleeding during bowel movements.External hemorrhoids occur outside the anus. They can result in difficulty cleaning the area after a bowel movement. If a blood clot forms in an external hemorrhoid, it can be very painful (thrombosed external hemorrhoid).Symptoms Hemorrhoids are most often not painful, but if a blood clot forms, they can be very painful.Common symptoms include:Painless bright red blood from the rectumAnal itching Anal ache or pain, especially while sitting Pain during bowel movements One or more hard or tender lumps near the anusExams and Tests Most of the time, a health care provider can diagnose hemorrhoids by simply looking at the rectal area. External hemorrhoids can often be detected this way.Tests that may help diagnose the problem include:Rectal examSigmoidoscopyAnoscopyTreatment Treatments for hemorrhoids include:Over-the-counter corticosteroid (for example, hydrocortisone) creams to help reduce pain and swellingHemorrhoid creams with lidocaine or other anesthetic to help reduce painStool softeners to help reduce straining and constipationThings you can do to reduce itching include:Apply witch hazel to the area with a cotton swab.Wear cotton underwear.Avoid toilet tissue with perfumes or colors. Use baby wipes instead.Try not to scratch the area. Sitz baths can help you to feel better. Sit in warm water for 10 to 15 minutes.If your hemorrhoids do not get better with home treatments, you may need some type of office treatment to shrink the hemorrhoids.If office treatment is not enough, some type of surgery may be necessary, such as removal of the hemorrhoids (hemorrhoidectomy). These procedures are generally used for people with severe bleeding or prolapse who have not responded to other therapy.Possible Complications The blood in the hemorrhoid may form clots. This can cause tissue around it to die. Surgery is sometimes needed to remove hemorrhoids with clots.Rarely, severe bleeding may also occur. Iron deficiency anemia can result from long-term blood loss.When to Contact a Medical Professional Contact your provider if:Hemorrhoid symptoms do not improve with home treatment.You have rectal bleeding. Your provider may want to check for other, more serious causes of the bleeding.Get medical help right away if:You lose a lot of bloodYou are bleeding and feel dizzy, lightheaded, or faintPrevention Constipation, straining during bowel movements, and sitting on the toilet too long raise your risk for hemorrhoids. To prevent constipation and hemorrhoids, you should:Drink plenty of fluids.Eat a high-fiber diet of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains.Consider using fiber supplements.Use stool softeners to prevent straining.Alternative Names Rectal lump; Piles; Lump in the rectum; Rectal bleeding - hemorrhoids; Blood in the stool - hemorrhoidsImages Hemorrhoids Hemorrhoid surgery - series References Bass LM, Wershil BK. Anatomy, histology, embryology, and developmental anomalies of the small and large intestine. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 98.Cameron J. Anorectal. In: Cameron J, ed. Current Surgical Therapy. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 5.Zainea GG, Pfenninger JL. Office treatment of hemorrhoids. In: Fowler GC, ed. Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 87. Review Date 9/9/2023 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, General Surgery Practice Specializing in Breast Cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Learn how to cite this page Related MedlinePlus Health Topics Hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are swollen veins in the anus or lower part of the rectum. Hemorrhoids are swollen veins in the anus or lower part of the rectum. Causes Hemorrhoids are very common. They result from increased pressure on the anus. This can occur during pregnancy or childbirth, and due to constipation. The pressure causes the normal anal veins and tissue to swell. This tissue can bleed, often during bowel movements.Hemorrhoids may be caused by:Straining during bowel movementsConstipationSitting for long periods of time, especially on the toiletCertain diseases, such as cirrhosisHemorrhoids may be inside or outside the body.Internal hemorrhoids occur just inside the anus, at the beginning of the rectum. When they are large, they may fall outside (prolapse). The most common problem with internal hemorrhoids is bleeding during bowel movements.External hemorrhoids occur outside the anus. They can result in difficulty cleaning the area after a bowel movement. If a blood clot forms in an external hemorrhoid, it can be very painful (thrombosed external hemorrhoid). Hemorrhoids are very common. They result from increased pressure on the anus. This can occur during pregnancy or childbirth, and due to constipation. The pressure causes the normal anal veins and tissue to swell. This tissue can bleed, often during bowel movements.Hemorrhoids may be caused by:Straining during bowel movementsConstipationSitting for long periods of time, especially on the toiletCertain diseases, such as cirrhosisHemorrhoids may be inside or outside the body.Internal hemorrhoids occur just inside the anus, at the beginning of the rectum. When they are large, they may fall outside (prolapse). The most common problem with internal hemorrhoids is bleeding during bowel movements.External hemorrhoids occur outside the anus. They can result in difficulty cleaning the area after a bowel movement. If a blood clot forms in an external hemorrhoid, it can be very painful (thrombosed external hemorrhoid). Hemorrhoids are very common. They result from increased pressure on the anus. This can occur during pregnancy or childbirth, and due to constipation. The pressure causes the normal anal veins and tissue to swell. This tissue can bleed, often during bowel movements. Straining during bowel movements Sitting for long periods of time, especially on the toilet Certain diseases, such as cirrhosis Hemorrhoids may be inside or outside the body. Internal hemorrhoids occur just inside the anus, at the beginning of the rectum. When they are large, they may fall outside (prolapse). The most common problem with internal hemorrhoids is bleeding during bowel movements. External hemorrhoids occur outside the anus. They can result in difficulty cleaning the area after a bowel movement. If a blood clot forms in an external hemorrhoid, it can be very painful (thrombosed external hemorrhoid). Symptoms Hemorrhoids are most often not painful, but if a blood clot forms, they can be very painful.Common symptoms include:Painless bright red blood from the rectumAnal itching Anal ache or pain, especially while sitting Pain during bowel movements One or more hard or tender lumps near the anus Hemorrhoids are most often not painful, but if a blood clot forms, they can be very painful.Common symptoms include:Painless bright red blood from the rectumAnal itching Anal ache or pain, especially while sitting Pain during bowel movements One or more hard or tender lumps near the anus Hemorrhoids are most often not painful, but if a blood clot forms, they can be very painful. Painless bright red blood from the rectum Anal ache or pain, especially while sitting One or more hard or tender lumps near the anus Exams and Tests Most of the time, a health care provider can diagnose hemorrhoids by simply looking at the rectal area. External hemorrhoids can often be detected this way.Tests that may help diagnose the problem include:Rectal examSigmoidoscopyAnoscopy Most of the time, a health care provider can diagnose hemorrhoids by simply looking at the rectal area. External hemorrhoids can often be detected this way.Tests that may help diagnose the problem include:Rectal examSigmoidoscopyAnoscopy Most of the time, a health care provider can diagnose hemorrhoids by simply looking at the rectal area. External hemorrhoids can often be detected this way. Tests that may help diagnose the problem include: Treatment Treatments for hemorrhoids include:Over-the-counter corticosteroid (for example, hydrocortisone) creams to help reduce pain and swellingHemorrhoid creams with lidocaine or other anesthetic to help reduce painStool softeners to help reduce straining and constipationThings you can do to reduce itching include:Apply witch hazel to the area with a cotton swab.Wear cotton underwear.Avoid toilet tissue with perfumes or colors. Use baby wipes instead.Try not to scratch the area. Sitz baths can help you to feel better. Sit in warm water for 10 to 15 minutes.If your hemorrhoids do not get better with home treatments, you may need some type of office treatment to shrink the hemorrhoids.If office treatment is not enough, some type of surgery may be necessary, such as removal of the hemorrhoids (hemorrhoidectomy). These procedures are generally used for people with severe bleeding or prolapse who have not responded to other therapy. Treatments for hemorrhoids include:Over-the-counter corticosteroid (for example, hydrocortisone) creams to help reduce pain and swellingHemorrhoid creams with lidocaine or other anesthetic to help reduce painStool softeners to help reduce straining and constipationThings you can do to reduce itching include:Apply witch hazel to the area with a cotton swab.Wear cotton underwear.Avoid toilet tissue with perfumes or colors. Use baby wipes instead.Try not to scratch the area. Sitz baths can help you to feel better. Sit in warm water for 10 to 15 minutes.If your hemorrhoids do not get better with home treatments, you may need some type of office treatment to shrink the hemorrhoids.If office treatment is not enough, some type of surgery may be necessary, such as removal of the hemorrhoids (hemorrhoidectomy). These procedures are generally used for people with severe bleeding or prolapse who have not responded to other therapy. Treatments for hemorrhoids include: Over-the-counter corticosteroid (for example, hydrocortisone) creams to help reduce pain and swelling Hemorrhoid creams with lidocaine or other anesthetic to help reduce pain Stool softeners to help reduce straining and constipation Things you can do to reduce itching include: Apply witch hazel to the area with a cotton swab. Avoid toilet tissue with perfumes or colors. Use baby wipes instead. Sitz baths can help you to feel better. Sit in warm water for 10 to 15 minutes. If your hemorrhoids do not get better with home treatments, you may need some type of office treatment to shrink the hemorrhoids. If office treatment is not enough, some type of surgery may be necessary, such as removal of the hemorrhoids (hemorrhoidectomy). These procedures are generally used for people with severe bleeding or prolapse who have not responded to other therapy. Possible Complications The blood in the hemorrhoid may form clots. This can cause tissue around it to die. Surgery is sometimes needed to remove hemorrhoids with clots.Rarely, severe bleeding may also occur. Iron deficiency anemia can result from long-term blood loss. The blood in the hemorrhoid may form clots. This can cause tissue around it to die. Surgery is sometimes needed to remove hemorrhoids with clots.Rarely, severe bleeding may also occur. Iron deficiency anemia can result from long-term blood loss. The blood in the hemorrhoid may form clots. This can cause tissue around it to die. Surgery is sometimes needed to remove hemorrhoids with clots. Rarely, severe bleeding may also occur. Iron deficiency anemia can result from long-term blood loss. When to Contact a Medical Professional Contact your provider if:Hemorrhoid symptoms do not improve with home treatment.You have rectal bleeding. Your provider may want to check for other, more serious causes of the bleeding.Get medical help right away if:You lose a lot of bloodYou are bleeding and feel dizzy, lightheaded, or faint When to Contact a Medical Professional When to Contact a Medical Professional Contact your provider if:Hemorrhoid symptoms do not improve with home treatment.You have rectal bleeding. Your provider may want to check for other, more serious causes of the bleeding.Get medical help right away if:You lose a lot of bloodYou are bleeding and feel dizzy, lightheaded, or faint Hemorrhoid symptoms do not improve with home treatment. You have rectal bleeding. Your provider may want to check for other, more serious causes of the bleeding. Get medical help right away if: You are bleeding and feel dizzy, lightheaded, or faint Prevention Constipation, straining during bowel movements, and sitting on the toilet too long raise your risk for hemorrhoids. To prevent constipation and hemorrhoids, you should:Drink plenty of fluids.Eat a high-fiber diet of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains.Consider using fiber supplements.Use stool softeners to prevent straining. Constipation, straining during bowel movements, and sitting on the toilet too long raise your risk for hemorrhoids. To prevent constipation and hemorrhoids, you should:Drink plenty of fluids.Eat a high-fiber diet of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains.Consider using fiber supplements.Use stool softeners to prevent straining. Constipation, straining during bowel movements, and sitting on the toilet too long raise your risk for hemorrhoids. To prevent constipation and hemorrhoids, you should: Eat a high-fiber diet of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. Consider using fiber supplements. Use stool softeners to prevent straining. Alternative Names Rectal lump; Piles; Lump in the rectum; Rectal bleeding - hemorrhoids; Blood in the stool - hemorrhoids Rectal lump; Piles; Lump in the rectum; Rectal bleeding - hemorrhoids; Blood in the stool - hemorrhoids Rectal lump; Piles; Lump in the rectum; Rectal bleeding - hemorrhoids; Blood in the stool - hemorrhoids Images Hemorrhoids Hemorrhoid surgery - series Hemorrhoids Hemorrhoid surgery - series References Bass LM, Wershil BK. Anatomy, histology, embryology, and developmental anomalies of the small and large intestine. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 98.Cameron J. Anorectal. In: Cameron J, ed. Current Surgical Therapy. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 5.Zainea GG, Pfenninger JL. Office treatment of hemorrhoids. In: Fowler GC, ed. Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 87. Bass LM, Wershil BK. Anatomy, histology, embryology, and developmental anomalies of the small and large intestine. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 98.Cameron J. Anorectal. In: Cameron J, ed. Current Surgical Therapy. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 5.Zainea GG, Pfenninger JL. Office treatment of hemorrhoids. In: Fowler GC, ed. Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 87. Bass LM, Wershil BK. Anatomy, histology, embryology, and developmental anomalies of the small and large intestine. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 98. Cameron J. Anorectal. In: Cameron J, ed. Current Surgical Therapy. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 5. Zainea GG, Pfenninger JL. Office treatment of hemorrhoids. In: Fowler GC, ed. Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 87. Review Date 9/9/2023 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, General Surgery Practice Specializing in Breast Cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, General Surgery Practice Specializing in Breast Cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, General Surgery Practice Specializing in Breast Cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Related MedlinePlus Health Topics Hemorrhoids Related MedlinePlus Health Topics Related MedlinePlus Health Topics