Title: Constipation in infants and children
Source: MedlinePlus
URL: https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/003125.htm
Topic: general
Word Count: 4676
Downloaded: 2025-11-21 19:06:21
================================================================================

Constipation in infants and children To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Constipation in infants and children means they have hard stools or have problems passing stools. A child may have pain while passing stools or may be unable to have a bowel movement after straining or pushing.Considerations Constipation is common in children. However, normal bowel movements are different for each child.In the first month, infants tend to have bowel movements about once a day. After that, babies can go a few days or even a week between bowel movements. It's also difficult to pass stools because their abdominal muscles are weak. So babies tend to strain, cry, and get red in the face when they have a bowel movement. This does not mean they are constipated. If bowel movements are soft, then there is likely no problem.Signs of constipation in infants and children may include:Being very fussy and spitting up more often (infants)Difficulty passing stools or seeming uncomfortableHard, dry stoolsPain when having a bowel movementBelly pain and bloatingLarge, wide stoolsBlood on the stool or on toilet paperTraces of liquid or stool in a child's underwear (may be a sign of fecal impaction)Having less than 3 bowel movements a week (children)Moving their body in different positions or clenching their buttocksMake sure your infant or child has a problem before treating constipation:Some children do not have a bowel movement every day.Also, some healthy children always have very soft stools.Other children have firm stools, but are able to pass them without problems. Causes Constipation occurs when the stool remains in the colon for too long. Too much water gets absorbed by the colon, leaving hard, dry stools.Constipation may be caused by:Ignoring the urge to use the toiletNot eating enough fiberNot drinking enough fluidsSwitching to solid foods or from breast milk to formula (infants)Changes in situation, such as travel, starting school, or stressful eventsMedical causes of constipation may include:Diseases of the bowel, such as those that affect the bowel muscles or nervesOther medical conditions that affect the bowelUse of certain medicinesChildren may ignore the urge to have a bowel movement because:They are not ready for toilet trainingThey are learning to control their bowel movementsThey have had previous painful bowel movements and want to avoid themThey don't want to use a school or public toiletHome Care Lifestyle changes can help your child avoid constipation. These changes can also be used to treat it.For infants:Give your baby extra water or juice during the day in between feedings. Juice can help bring water to the colon.Over 2 months old: Try 2 to 4 ounces (59 to 118 mL) of fruit juice (grape, pear, apple, cherry, or prune) twice a day.Over 4 months old: If the baby has started to eat solid foods, try baby foods with high-fiber content such as peas, beans, apricots, prunes, peaches, pears, plums, and spinach twice a day.For children:Drink plenty of fluids each day. Your child's health care provider can tell you how much.Eat more fruits and vegetables and foods high in fiber, such as whole grains.Avoid certain foods such as cheese, fast food, prepared and processed foods, meat, and ice cream.Stop toilet training if your child becomes constipated. Resume after your child is no longer constipated.Teach older children to use the toilet right after eating a meal.Stool softeners (such as those containing docusate sodium) may help for older children. Bulk laxatives such as psyllium may help add fluid and bulk to the stool. Suppositories or gentle laxatives may help your child have regular bowel movements. Electrolyte solutions like Miralax can also be effective.Some children may need enemas or prescription laxatives. These methods should be used only if fiber, fluids, and stool softeners do not provide enough relief.Do not give laxatives or enemas to children without first asking your child's provider.When to Contact a Medical Professional Contact your child's provider right away if:An infant (except those who are only breastfed) goes 3 days without a stool and is vomiting or irritableAlso contact your child's provider if:An infant younger than 2 months is constipated.Non-breastfeeding infants go 3 days without having a bowel movement (Contact your child's provider right awayÂ if there is vomiting or irritability.)A child is holding back bowel movements to resist toilet training.There is blood in the stools.What to Expect at Your Office Visit Your child's provider will perform a physical exam. This may include a rectal exam.The provider may ask you questions about your child's diet, symptoms, and bowel habits.The following tests may help find the cause of constipation:Blood tests such as a complete blood count (CBC)X-rays of the abdomenThe provider may recommend the use of stool softeners or laxatives. If stools are impacted, glycerin suppositories or saline enemas may be recommended also.Alternative Names Irregularity of bowels; Lack of regular bowel movementsPatient Instructions Constipation - what to ask your doctor High-fiber foods Images Sources of fiber Digestive system organs References Kwan KY. Abdominal pain. In: Olympia RP, ed. Urgent Care Medicine Secrets. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 26.Maqbool A, Liacouras CA. Major symptoms and signs of digestive tract disorders. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 352.National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Definition & facts for constipation in children: what is constipation in children? www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/constipation-children/definition-facts. Updated May 2018. Accessed August 9, 2024. Review Date 7/31/2024 Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Learn how to cite this page Related MedlinePlus Health Topics Constipation Constipation in infants and children To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. Constipation in infants and children Constipation in infants and children means they have hard stools or have problems passing stools. A child may have pain while passing stools or may be unable to have a bowel movement after straining or pushing.Considerations Constipation is common in children. However, normal bowel movements are different for each child.In the first month, infants tend to have bowel movements about once a day. After that, babies can go a few days or even a week between bowel movements. It's also difficult to pass stools because their abdominal muscles are weak. So babies tend to strain, cry, and get red in the face when they have a bowel movement. This does not mean they are constipated. If bowel movements are soft, then there is likely no problem.Signs of constipation in infants and children may include:Being very fussy and spitting up more often (infants)Difficulty passing stools or seeming uncomfortableHard, dry stoolsPain when having a bowel movementBelly pain and bloatingLarge, wide stoolsBlood on the stool or on toilet paperTraces of liquid or stool in a child's underwear (may be a sign of fecal impaction)Having less than 3 bowel movements a week (children)Moving their body in different positions or clenching their buttocksMake sure your infant or child has a problem before treating constipation:Some children do not have a bowel movement every day.Also, some healthy children always have very soft stools.Other children have firm stools, but are able to pass them without problems. Causes Constipation occurs when the stool remains in the colon for too long. Too much water gets absorbed by the colon, leaving hard, dry stools.Constipation may be caused by:Ignoring the urge to use the toiletNot eating enough fiberNot drinking enough fluidsSwitching to solid foods or from breast milk to formula (infants)Changes in situation, such as travel, starting school, or stressful eventsMedical causes of constipation may include:Diseases of the bowel, such as those that affect the bowel muscles or nervesOther medical conditions that affect the bowelUse of certain medicinesChildren may ignore the urge to have a bowel movement because:They are not ready for toilet trainingThey are learning to control their bowel movementsThey have had previous painful bowel movements and want to avoid themThey don't want to use a school or public toiletHome Care Lifestyle changes can help your child avoid constipation. These changes can also be used to treat it.For infants:Give your baby extra water or juice during the day in between feedings. Juice can help bring water to the colon.Over 2 months old: Try 2 to 4 ounces (59 to 118 mL) of fruit juice (grape, pear, apple, cherry, or prune) twice a day.Over 4 months old: If the baby has started to eat solid foods, try baby foods with high-fiber content such as peas, beans, apricots, prunes, peaches, pears, plums, and spinach twice a day.For children:Drink plenty of fluids each day. Your child's health care provider can tell you how much.Eat more fruits and vegetables and foods high in fiber, such as whole grains.Avoid certain foods such as cheese, fast food, prepared and processed foods, meat, and ice cream.Stop toilet training if your child becomes constipated. Resume after your child is no longer constipated.Teach older children to use the toilet right after eating a meal.Stool softeners (such as those containing docusate sodium) may help for older children. Bulk laxatives such as psyllium may help add fluid and bulk to the stool. Suppositories or gentle laxatives may help your child have regular bowel movements. Electrolyte solutions like Miralax can also be effective.Some children may need enemas or prescription laxatives. These methods should be used only if fiber, fluids, and stool softeners do not provide enough relief.Do not give laxatives or enemas to children without first asking your child's provider.When to Contact a Medical Professional Contact your child's provider right away if:An infant (except those who are only breastfed) goes 3 days without a stool and is vomiting or irritableAlso contact your child's provider if:An infant younger than 2 months is constipated.Non-breastfeeding infants go 3 days without having a bowel movement (Contact your child's provider right awayÂ if there is vomiting or irritability.)A child is holding back bowel movements to resist toilet training.There is blood in the stools.What to Expect at Your Office Visit Your child's provider will perform a physical exam. This may include a rectal exam.The provider may ask you questions about your child's diet, symptoms, and bowel habits.The following tests may help find the cause of constipation:Blood tests such as a complete blood count (CBC)X-rays of the abdomenThe provider may recommend the use of stool softeners or laxatives. If stools are impacted, glycerin suppositories or saline enemas may be recommended also.Alternative Names Irregularity of bowels; Lack of regular bowel movementsPatient Instructions Constipation - what to ask your doctor High-fiber foods Images Sources of fiber Digestive system organs References Kwan KY. Abdominal pain. In: Olympia RP, ed. Urgent Care Medicine Secrets. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 26.Maqbool A, Liacouras CA. Major symptoms and signs of digestive tract disorders. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 352.National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Definition & facts for constipation in children: what is constipation in children? www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/constipation-children/definition-facts. Updated May 2018. Accessed August 9, 2024. Review Date 7/31/2024 Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Learn how to cite this page Related MedlinePlus Health Topics Constipation Constipation in infants and children means they have hard stools or have problems passing stools. A child may have pain while passing stools or may be unable to have a bowel movement after straining or pushing. Constipation in infants and children means they have hard stools or have problems passing stools. A child may have pain while passing stools or may be unable to have a bowel movement after straining or pushing. Considerations Constipation is common in children. However, normal bowel movements are different for each child.In the first month, infants tend to have bowel movements about once a day. After that, babies can go a few days or even a week between bowel movements. It's also difficult to pass stools because their abdominal muscles are weak. So babies tend to strain, cry, and get red in the face when they have a bowel movement. This does not mean they are constipated. If bowel movements are soft, then there is likely no problem.Signs of constipation in infants and children may include:Being very fussy and spitting up more often (infants)Difficulty passing stools or seeming uncomfortableHard, dry stoolsPain when having a bowel movementBelly pain and bloatingLarge, wide stoolsBlood on the stool or on toilet paperTraces of liquid or stool in a child's underwear (may be a sign of fecal impaction)Having less than 3 bowel movements a week (children)Moving their body in different positions or clenching their buttocksMake sure your infant or child has a problem before treating constipation:Some children do not have a bowel movement every day.Also, some healthy children always have very soft stools.Other children have firm stools, but are able to pass them without problems. Constipation is common in children. However, normal bowel movements are different for each child.In the first month, infants tend to have bowel movements about once a day. After that, babies can go a few days or even a week between bowel movements. It's also difficult to pass stools because their abdominal muscles are weak. So babies tend to strain, cry, and get red in the face when they have a bowel movement. This does not mean they are constipated. If bowel movements are soft, then there is likely no problem.Signs of constipation in infants and children may include:Being very fussy and spitting up more often (infants)Difficulty passing stools or seeming uncomfortableHard, dry stoolsPain when having a bowel movementBelly pain and bloatingLarge, wide stoolsBlood on the stool or on toilet paperTraces of liquid or stool in a child's underwear (may be a sign of fecal impaction)Having less than 3 bowel movements a week (children)Moving their body in different positions or clenching their buttocksMake sure your infant or child has a problem before treating constipation:Some children do not have a bowel movement every day.Also, some healthy children always have very soft stools.Other children have firm stools, but are able to pass them without problems. Constipation is common in children. However, normal bowel movements are different for each child. In the first month, infants tend to have bowel movements about once a day. After that, babies can go a few days or even a week between bowel movements. It's also difficult to pass stools because their abdominal muscles are weak. So babies tend to strain, cry, and get red in the face when they have a bowel movement. This does not mean they are constipated. If bowel movements are soft, then there is likely no problem. Signs of constipation in infants and children may include: Being very fussy and spitting up more often (infants) Difficulty passing stools or seeming uncomfortable Pain when having a bowel movement Blood on the stool or on toilet paper Traces of liquid or stool in a child's underwear (may be a sign of fecal impaction) Having less than 3 bowel movements a week (children) Moving their body in different positions or clenching their buttocks Make sure your infant or child has a problem before treating constipation: Some children do not have a bowel movement every day. Also, some healthy children always have very soft stools. Other children have firm stools, but are able to pass them without problems. Causes Constipation occurs when the stool remains in the colon for too long. Too much water gets absorbed by the colon, leaving hard, dry stools.Constipation may be caused by:Ignoring the urge to use the toiletNot eating enough fiberNot drinking enough fluidsSwitching to solid foods or from breast milk to formula (infants)Changes in situation, such as travel, starting school, or stressful eventsMedical causes of constipation may include:Diseases of the bowel, such as those that affect the bowel muscles or nervesOther medical conditions that affect the bowelUse of certain medicinesChildren may ignore the urge to have a bowel movement because:They are not ready for toilet trainingThey are learning to control their bowel movementsThey have had previous painful bowel movements and want to avoid themThey don't want to use a school or public toilet Constipation occurs when the stool remains in the colon for too long. Too much water gets absorbed by the colon, leaving hard, dry stools.Constipation may be caused by:Ignoring the urge to use the toiletNot eating enough fiberNot drinking enough fluidsSwitching to solid foods or from breast milk to formula (infants)Changes in situation, such as travel, starting school, or stressful eventsMedical causes of constipation may include:Diseases of the bowel, such as those that affect the bowel muscles or nervesOther medical conditions that affect the bowelUse of certain medicinesChildren may ignore the urge to have a bowel movement because:They are not ready for toilet trainingThey are learning to control their bowel movementsThey have had previous painful bowel movements and want to avoid themThey don't want to use a school or public toilet Constipation occurs when the stool remains in the colon for too long. Too much water gets absorbed by the colon, leaving hard, dry stools. Ignoring the urge to use the toilet Switching to solid foods or from breast milk to formula (infants) Changes in situation, such as travel, starting school, or stressful events Medical causes of constipation may include: Diseases of the bowel, such as those that affect the bowel muscles or nerves Other medical conditions that affect the bowel Children may ignore the urge to have a bowel movement because: They are not ready for toilet training They are learning to control their bowel movements They have had previous painful bowel movements and want to avoid them They don't want to use a school or public toilet Home Care Lifestyle changes can help your child avoid constipation. These changes can also be used to treat it.For infants:Give your baby extra water or juice during the day in between feedings. Juice can help bring water to the colon.Over 2 months old: Try 2 to 4 ounces (59 to 118 mL) of fruit juice (grape, pear, apple, cherry, or prune) twice a day.Over 4 months old: If the baby has started to eat solid foods, try baby foods with high-fiber content such as peas, beans, apricots, prunes, peaches, pears, plums, and spinach twice a day.For children:Drink plenty of fluids each day. Your child's health care provider can tell you how much.Eat more fruits and vegetables and foods high in fiber, such as whole grains.Avoid certain foods such as cheese, fast food, prepared and processed foods, meat, and ice cream.Stop toilet training if your child becomes constipated. Resume after your child is no longer constipated.Teach older children to use the toilet right after eating a meal.Stool softeners (such as those containing docusate sodium) may help for older children. Bulk laxatives such as psyllium may help add fluid and bulk to the stool. Suppositories or gentle laxatives may help your child have regular bowel movements. Electrolyte solutions like Miralax can also be effective.Some children may need enemas or prescription laxatives. These methods should be used only if fiber, fluids, and stool softeners do not provide enough relief.Do not give laxatives or enemas to children without first asking your child's provider. Lifestyle changes can help your child avoid constipation. These changes can also be used to treat it.For infants:Give your baby extra water or juice during the day in between feedings. Juice can help bring water to the colon.Over 2 months old: Try 2 to 4 ounces (59 to 118 mL) of fruit juice (grape, pear, apple, cherry, or prune) twice a day.Over 4 months old: If the baby has started to eat solid foods, try baby foods with high-fiber content such as peas, beans, apricots, prunes, peaches, pears, plums, and spinach twice a day.For children:Drink plenty of fluids each day. Your child's health care provider can tell you how much.Eat more fruits and vegetables and foods high in fiber, such as whole grains.Avoid certain foods such as cheese, fast food, prepared and processed foods, meat, and ice cream.Stop toilet training if your child becomes constipated. Resume after your child is no longer constipated.Teach older children to use the toilet right after eating a meal.Stool softeners (such as those containing docusate sodium) may help for older children. Bulk laxatives such as psyllium may help add fluid and bulk to the stool. Suppositories or gentle laxatives may help your child have regular bowel movements. Electrolyte solutions like Miralax can also be effective.Some children may need enemas or prescription laxatives. These methods should be used only if fiber, fluids, and stool softeners do not provide enough relief.Do not give laxatives or enemas to children without first asking your child's provider. Lifestyle changes can help your child avoid constipation. These changes can also be used to treat it. Give your baby extra water or juice during the day in between feedings. Juice can help bring water to the colon. Over 2 months old: Try 2 to 4 ounces (59 to 118 mL) of fruit juice (grape, pear, apple, cherry, or prune) twice a day. Over 4 months old: If the baby has started to eat solid foods, try baby foods with high-fiber content such as peas, beans, apricots, prunes, peaches, pears, plums, and spinach twice a day. Drink plenty of fluids each day. Your child's health care provider can tell you how much. Eat more fruits and vegetables and foods high in fiber, such as whole grains. Avoid certain foods such as cheese, fast food, prepared and processed foods, meat, and ice cream. Stop toilet training if your child becomes constipated. Resume after your child is no longer constipated. Teach older children to use the toilet right after eating a meal. Stool softeners (such as those containing docusate sodium) may help for older children. Bulk laxatives such as psyllium may help add fluid and bulk to the stool. Suppositories or gentle laxatives may help your child have regular bowel movements. Electrolyte solutions like Miralax can also be effective. Some children may need enemas or prescription laxatives. These methods should be used only if fiber, fluids, and stool softeners do not provide enough relief. Do not give laxatives or enemas to children without first asking your child's provider. When to Contact a Medical Professional Contact your child's provider right away if:An infant (except those who are only breastfed) goes 3 days without a stool and is vomiting or irritableAlso contact your child's provider if:An infant younger than 2 months is constipated.Non-breastfeeding infants go 3 days without having a bowel movement (Contact your child's provider right awayÂ if there is vomiting or irritability.)A child is holding back bowel movements to resist toilet training.There is blood in the stools. When to Contact a Medical Professional When to Contact a Medical Professional Contact your child's provider right away if:An infant (except those who are only breastfed) goes 3 days without a stool and is vomiting or irritableAlso contact your child's provider if:An infant younger than 2 months is constipated.Non-breastfeeding infants go 3 days without having a bowel movement (Contact your child's provider right awayÂ if there is vomiting or irritability.)A child is holding back bowel movements to resist toilet training.There is blood in the stools. Contact your child's provider right away if: An infant (except those who are only breastfed) goes 3 days without a stool and is vomiting or irritable Also contact your child's provider if: An infant younger than 2 months is constipated. Non-breastfeeding infants go 3 days without having a bowel movement (Contact your child's provider right awayÂ if there is vomiting or irritability.) A child is holding back bowel movements to resist toilet training. What to Expect at Your Office Visit Your child's provider will perform a physical exam. This may include a rectal exam.The provider may ask you questions about your child's diet, symptoms, and bowel habits.The following tests may help find the cause of constipation:Blood tests such as a complete blood count (CBC)X-rays of the abdomenThe provider may recommend the use of stool softeners or laxatives. If stools are impacted, glycerin suppositories or saline enemas may be recommended also. What to Expect at Your Office Visit What to Expect at Your Office Visit Your child's provider will perform a physical exam. This may include a rectal exam.The provider may ask you questions about your child's diet, symptoms, and bowel habits.The following tests may help find the cause of constipation:Blood tests such as a complete blood count (CBC)X-rays of the abdomenThe provider may recommend the use of stool softeners or laxatives. If stools are impacted, glycerin suppositories or saline enemas may be recommended also. Your child's provider will perform a physical exam. This may include a rectal exam. The provider may ask you questions about your child's diet, symptoms, and bowel habits. The following tests may help find the cause of constipation: Blood tests such as a complete blood count (CBC) The provider may recommend the use of stool softeners or laxatives. If stools are impacted, glycerin suppositories or saline enemas may be recommended also. Alternative Names Irregularity of bowels; Lack of regular bowel movements Irregularity of bowels; Lack of regular bowel movements Irregularity of bowels; Lack of regular bowel movements Patient Instructions Constipation - what to ask your doctor High-fiber foods Constipation - what to ask your doctor High-fiber foods Constipation - what to ask your doctor Images Sources of fiber Digestive system organs Sources of fiber Digestive system organs References Kwan KY. Abdominal pain. In: Olympia RP, ed. Urgent Care Medicine Secrets. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 26.Maqbool A, Liacouras CA. Major symptoms and signs of digestive tract disorders. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 352.National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Definition & facts for constipation in children: what is constipation in children? www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/constipation-children/definition-facts. Updated May 2018. Accessed August 9, 2024. Kwan KY. Abdominal pain. In: Olympia RP, ed. Urgent Care Medicine Secrets. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 26.Maqbool A, Liacouras CA. Major symptoms and signs of digestive tract disorders. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 352.National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Definition & facts for constipation in children: what is constipation in children? www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/constipation-children/definition-facts. Updated May 2018. Accessed August 9, 2024. Kwan KY. Abdominal pain. In: Olympia RP, ed. Urgent Care Medicine Secrets. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 26. Maqbool A, Liacouras CA. Major symptoms and signs of digestive tract disorders. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 352. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Definition & facts for constipation in children: what is constipation in children? www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/constipation-children/definition-facts. Updated May 2018. Accessed August 9, 2024. Review Date 7/31/2024 Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Related MedlinePlus Health Topics Constipation Related MedlinePlus Health Topics Related MedlinePlus Health Topics